---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on the AI systems in Horizon: Zero Dawn"
date:   2021-06-10 00:00:00 -0500
categories: game
published: false
---

- (UE4) Dynamic material instance / https://www.raywenderlich.com/504-unreal-engine-4-materials-tutorial#toc-anchor-011
- (UE4) Procedural mesh generation / https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dKlMEmVgbvg
- (Unity) Mesh deformation / https://catlikecoding.com/unity/tutorials/mesh-deformation/

Idea
- Study the UV coordinate of high-poly cube, then study its deformation using wpo of material editor

===

Thesis
Machine learning techniques, due to its higher barrier to entry and relative lack of direct and deterministic control, are severely underutilized in the game industry. However, with the confluence of in-game economy backed by blockchain (e.g. via playable NFTs), the beginning of open-development games (e.g. Life Beyond), the specialization of computation towards machine learning and deep learning in order to revive Moore's Law, the increase in time spent in game worlds across the globe, and the demand for ever-richer game content + game worlds + character expressive range, machine learning techniques will become heavily relied upon during the game development process in 5-10 years.

Proposal
My goal is to explore data-driven procedural generation of the skills and associated animations of the player-controlled characters. Specifically, the exploration will cover:
1) the algorithm of the procedural processes, likely involving machine learning techniques
2) the human-machine collaboration pattern of the procedural processes
3) the prototyping of game worlds navigated by player-controlled characters generated by such procedural processes
4) the open development methodology supporting such game worlds
5) the in-game incentive mechanism, likely via blockchain or blockchain incentivization techniques, to form a positive feedback loop between the procedural processes and player participation

Definition of skill:
A skill constitutes a particular mapping between player input (keyboard, mouse etc) and the behavior of the player-controlled character. For example, pressing key W results in the character moving forward in a particular way - this mapping corresponds to the forward movement skill. The mapping may also be dependent on the state of the character situated in the game world. For example, in Scavengers (2021), pressing the crouch key while sliding down on any ramp at a speed exceeding a certain threshold would trigger a slide-jump. Finally, the execution of every skill is paired with a certain character animation.
