---
layout: post
title:  "Practical Rateless IBLT: Part 2"
date:   2024-11-01 00:00:00 -0500
categories: idea
published: false
---

This is the second part of a friendly digest of the [PRIBLT paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.02668){:target="_blank"}. Now, we dive into PRIBLT.

## Context

Denote Alice's set of things as $$A$$, and Bob's $$B$$.

Denote the symmetric difference between their sets as $$A \triangle B$$.

Neither Alice nor Bob knows anything about the other's set. They wish to learn $$A \triangle B$$ by communicating over a reliable channel.

## Problem

Design a coding scheme, comprising an encoding procedure $$\mathbb{C}$$ and a corresponding decoding procedure $$\mathbb{D}$$, so that:

1. Alice uses $$\mathbb{C}$$ to transform $$A$$ into an *infinite stream* of *coded symbols* $$\mathbb{C}(A) = \{a_0, a_1, a_2, ...\}$$.

2. Alice streams her coded symbols to Bob over a reliable communication channel.

2. Bob also uses $$\mathbb{C}$$ to transform $$B$$ into coded symbols $$\mathbb{C}(B) = \{b_0, b_1, b_2, ...\}$$.

3. Bob, upon starting to receive Alice's coded symbols, "subtract" (XOR) them pair-wise from his own coded symbols to produce the coded *diffs* $$\{a_0 \oplus b_0, a_1 \oplus b_1, a_2 \oplus b_2, ...\}$$.

4. Every time Bob yields a new coded diff, Bob attempts to decode (inverse transform) them using $$\mathbb{D}$$ to obtain the entire $$A \triangle B$$.

5. If decoding succeeds, Bob tells Alice to stop sending her coded symbols.

The coding scheme must meet the following requirements:

1. $$\mathbb{C}(A) \oplus \mathbb{C}(B) = \mathbb{C}(A \triangle B)$$. Equivalently, $$\mathbb{D}(\mathbb{C}(A) \oplus \mathbb{C}(B)) = A \triangle B$$. This means by decoding the coded diffs (*i.e.* $$\mathbb{D}(\mathbb{C}(A) \oplus \mathbb{C}(B))$$), Bob obtains the set difference ($$A \triangle B$$).

2. Denote the size of the set difference as $$d$$, namely $$d = \vert A \triangle B \vert$$. With high probability, Bob can successfully decode $$\mathbb{C}(A \triangle B)$$ using the first $$O(d)$$ coded symbols sent by Alice.

## Mapping $$\Rightarrow$$ yielding

In IBLT, we map a set of elements to a set of coded symbols. The sizes of both sets are finite and predetermined.

In rateless IBLT, we transform a set of elements into an infinite stream of coded symbols. Such transformation is no longer a mapping function from a set to another set. Instead, we *yield* the coded symbols.

Imagine the following process:
- There's a *machine*. It's a black box. It's stateful.
- We press a button and ask "which is the next coded symbol that my source symbol $$s$$ maps to?"
- The machine says "7th".
- We press the button again and ask the same question.
- The machine says "12th".
- We press the button again...

If we repeat the process above for each element in our set, we are able to yield as many *coded symbol indices* as we want.

An element in our set may be mapped to 1st, 3rd, 8th, 19th, and 37th coded symbols. It doesn't "stop" at 37th. It's simply because we press the button five times for this element so we get five answers.

With these indices, we are able to compute the actual coded symbols. For example, if element $$s_3$$, $$s_4$$, $$s_{20}$$ in our set $$S$$ are mapped to the 2nd coded symbol, that coded symbol turns out to be:

- $$sum$$ = $$s_3 \oplus s_4 \oplus s_{20}$$
- $$checksum$$ = $$hash(s_3) \oplus hash(s_4) \oplus hash(s_{20})$$

## Review: a pure coded symbol

Let's review a concept covered in [part 1](https://www.guiltygyoza.xyz/2024/09/priblt){:target="_blank"}: the *pure* coded symbol.

A pure coded symbol is one that is made up of exactly one source element.

The pure coded symbol made up of source element $$s$$ is:
- $$sum$$ = $$s$$
- $$checksum$$ = $$hash(s)$$

Given a coded symbol, we can easily check if it is pure: we check if its $$checksum$$ equals the hash of its $$sum$$.

As explained in part 1, a pure coded symbol allows us to begin decoding, which is a peeling process.

## Finding the shape of distribution

How many coded symbols do we need to decode $$\mathbb{C}(A \triangle B)$$? By the design of PRIBLT, we want it to be at the order of $$O(d)$$.

Two requirements are implied. In the first $$O(d)$$ coded symbols:

1. There needs to be at least one pure coded symbol to kickstart decoding.
2. There needs to be at least $$d$$ non-empty coded symbols. This is because during decoding, each non-empty coded symbol either "unlocks" one source element or none.

These requirements already inform the shape of the *distribution* - the distribution of elements in $$A \triangle B$$ among the coded symbols $$\mathbb{C}(A \triangle B)$$.

The idea is that at smaller indices, coded symbols are made up of more source elements; at larger indices, coded symbols are made up of less source elements. At sufficiently large indices, coded symbols are either empty (*i.e.* no source element maps to it) or pure.

Let's use $$P(i)$$ to call the probability distribution of "how probable is an arbitrary source element mapped to the $$i^{th}$$ coded symbol".

Let $$P(i)$$ be a function that is inversely proportional to $$i$$. The smaller the $$i$$, the more "crowded" the coded symbol's composition is. The larger the $$i$$, the thinner it is.

In this lens:
- the 1st requirement above basically wants $$P(i)$$ to drop *fast enough* over $$i$$ so that we get the first pure coded symbol before going outside of $$O(d)$$ length.
- the 2nd requirement above wants $$P(i)$$ to drop *slow enough* over $$i$$ so that we get enough non-empty coded symbols within $$O(d)$$ length.

It turns out that a reasonable choice for $$P(i)$$ is in the form:

$$\frac{1}{1 + \alpha i}$$

where $$\alpha > 0$$.

## The yielding machine

Given the probability function, we can start yielding the coded symbols right?

TODO: after establishing alpha=0.5, plot P(i)